Deep in the Shahnama, the book of Kings, lies the tale of Siyavush, which Firdawsi sings.
The Fire Ordeal of Siyavush, a celebrated Persian literary hero.
Innocence tested against the flames, survives another morrow.
Siyavush, our legendary prince, of the nobel Iranian empire, name meaning “black horse”
who too will be tested against the fire. Handsome, respected and loved by all.
Little did our prince know, desirability would be his downfall.
Enter the temptress, Sudaba his step mother, who forms lustrous feelings, demands the night together.
Entice the young prince which her sexual advances,
but Siyavush would not give in to these adulterous romances.
Enraged by rejection of her affection, she demands conviction with the use of fabrication
of lies against the prince, who touched and probed and molested the mistress,
Sudaba now demands that Siyavush be taken out of existence
Like the ashes in the wind, word gets back to the king.
Upon hear the false deeds committed by his son,
a feud develops between his head and his heart.
Whilst the fabricated assault against his wife cause the Shah a great deal of strife.
To end the suffering and gain the innocence he aspires, Siyavush demands to endure...
the Ordeal of Fire.
Conquer the flames that smoke the sky a greyness of lead,
and burn the land a scorching, murderous red. Charge into the heat, only innocence can beat,
to emerge victorious is to be righteous.
The people of the city lookout, rooting for the young prince,
he enters the fires, for this ordeal will convince…
He cannot be seen, oh no their prince is lost. His misdeeds against Sudaba, his life was the cost
But alas, at the edge, what do they observe, a silhouette of life,
could the Siyavush be preserved.
When all unsmirched, unsinged, unstained, unled, the guiltless Siyawush approached, his sire
All rejoice and celebrate for innocence is claimed by undergoing the Ordeal of Fire.
Our mighty hero emerges, on his black steed he rides,
Untouched by the flame, unfazed by Sudaba’s lies.
The people cheer, over and over, for their prince is alive
and thank the god for allowing good to survive
The prince triumphs, and all crimes dissolved,
thought the matter of Sudaba and her lies is yet to be resolved.
Sudaba watches from the window, her sins now her own,
the decision is to be disowned, stripped of her thrown.
Luckily Sudaba’s blood was not destined to bleed…….
As Siyavush rode in on his valiant steed. No father please do not give her death
I beg, I pled, I allow her breath, and thus the Shah ultimately declared
That Sudaba’s life be spared
Alas Siyavush rode out the fire and into our hearts
Caused by wrongful desire, and his story imparts that lies are wrongful and will receive justice
A flame separates innocence from corruptness. Just like our image the fire burns bright
Thou not as strongly as Siyavush, a godlily light. Positioned in front, the center of sight
The portray itself, deems him to be right.
Thus ends the tale of Siyavush and the Ordeal of Fire
but its tellings and retellings deserved to be remembered